AMDG
 
 
 
Paraphrasing Homer: The Relation between the Psellos Paraphrase and the Commentary Tradition

Nikolas Churik

 
Introduction and Presentation of the Problem
        	 
The Homeric epics were crucial texts in the literary education of Greek speakers in antiquity. The importance of the epics led to the prominence and proliferation of glossographic material, including lexica, paraphrases, scholia, and lexical glosses. These texts acted as study aids and references for teachers, students, and general readers of the texts.[1] The paraphrases present a special branch of this corpus because they attempt not only to define difficult or obscure words, but also to recast the syntax into less complex prose. Debate surrounds the precise nature of the paraphrases, but the predominant opinion holds that they were pre-existing glosses connected into a continuous work.[2]  Although the coincidence of these lexical glosses, and other parts of the glossographic tradition with the paraphrases, particularly the one attributed to Michael Psellos, is significant and striking,[3] there are serious divergences. Traditional scholarship tends to hold the paraphrases as merely a mechanistic transmission or “review” of glosses that have been connected into a running text.[4] The contention of this paper is that while the paraphrase draws heavily from these lexical glosses, it is not simply a “review” of them, but it also demonstrates innovation that offers an additional and sometimes alternative source by which to understand the text and its reception. Even though the paraphrase provides a gloss for each word, it transmits the sense of text rather than an exact one-to-one correspondence. It offers different Byzantine translations for the same Homeric word or phrase. This paper will present a review of past scholarship on the paraphrases and then present examples from the text of the paraphrase to elucidate its argument. In making its argument about innovation, the paper will also discuss notions of translation and make comparisons with other texts.



Within a given manuscript, the text may be commented on by a variety of sources, including grammatical, historical, mythographic, and philological scholia; individual word glosses; and continuous prose paraphrases. As one can see in the various manuscripts, the scribe put these scholiastic and glossographic materials in different and distinct locations on the page and in relation to the text, as an examination of various manuscripts would demonstrate. These different locations are suggestive of content and source. The mise-en-page cannot be discounted for a purely textual reading. Although these texts are in certain ways distinct, overlap and agreement among them suggest a certain degree of continuity, which begs for a holistic reading. The divisions of the texts as they appear on the page point to their meaning and purpose within the scholiastic corpus.[5] Within this study, three different, though related, sources of commentary will be examined. Interlinear scholia from the Venetus A, which lie above the word upon which they comment, provide lexical glosses. The Homeric Lexicon of Apollonius Sophistes, following the text of Bekker, provides a text separate from the body of the epic text. The paraphrase, which in both the Marciana 841 and Omega I.12 lies in a column parallel to the epic text, offers a “translation” into a later idiom. These two manuscripts, along the Marciana 454, represent “deluxe” editions of the text that hold a wide range of scholarly commentary in addition to the epic text. Wahlgren observes the debate on the question of readership,
We may wonder for whom metaphrases were meant. Browning (1978:125) thinks of a common readership for low-register and metaphrastic literature, a readership ‘not educated in the classicizing language.’ Ševčenko (1982:228-9), on the other hand, points out that it is people with the highest education who seem to be reading these texts.[6]  
While Browning is correct that the language is not “Classicizing” Schriftsprache, it is the language of commentaries. He goes on to say, “Thus, as in earlier classicizing literature, there is no direct imitation of classical models and the actual classical usage is not decisive.”[7] This is within the register found elsewhere in the scholiastic corpus. Ševčenko seems to have the proper view, even if one views the text solely on the level of artifact. The fact that such manuscripts contain the paraphrase texts already suggests that they had value for people who were interested in deeper philological and literary questions and were not reserved for educational or school texts as some have previously suggested.


Several scholars have noted the age of scholia: since the oldest seems to date from the third century B.C., they comprise some of the oldest meta-Homeric material that exists. With this age have come both additions and subtractions, leading to a come variation in the texts, “The scholia are eclectic compilations from a variety of sources, many of ancient origin, which have been added to and ‘improved’ upon by the Byzantine commentators.”[8] The paraphrase is, then, of an already chimerical nature. The macaronic content is enhanced by the fact that this set of “scholia” is culled largely from a Hellenistic lexicon and then compiled by a Byzantine scholar. The Psellos paraphrase offers an interesting problem of categorization because it clearly is derived from Hellenistic source material, but it was compiled and arranged in the eleventh century. Since it is something of mixed text, it provides a challenge to comprehending the commentary tradition. Analyzing the text along standard period lines proves to be impossible, so one must understand it as part of the continuum of the commentary line, rather than falling squarely within the Hellenistic or Byzantine lines.


Because the Homeric epics held such an eminent place in Byzantine literature, the supporting material that grew up around them is vast. Nevertheless natural changes in language brought about challenges in understanding the texts. When one considers the codicological evidence, it is evident that the material created to alleviate this difficulty proliferated to very high levels of literary spheres, “Even a high-level Byzantine language form can be at best no more than a reflection of how the ancient language was perceived in the Byzantine language community.”[9] The language had changed so that even the greatest of the literati made use of them. The fact that there is paraphrastic material in both the Marciana 454 and Omega I.12, both of which were evidently meant for high level readers interested in scholarly commentary, suggests strongly that this ancillary text was used and read within higher registers.  


Scholia and scholiastic material present both a meta-literature and a genre of its own. They exist to comment on pre-existing authors and works, but by their existence they constitute their own style. Within their texts, they preserve ancient scholarship on even older works and present the understanding receive by several generations of critics.[10] Recent scholarship, particularly by Dickey, Montanari, and Nünlist, has worked to elucidate the meaning and style behind the prose of these commentators. Within these contemporary studies, the texts available to ancient scholars have been suggested, and their interests in the works have been revealed.[11]  These studies have also illuminated the variety of sources used and quoted by the ancient critics. Because of the breadth of the corpus, the question of how to read it arises. That is to say, there remains the question of what portions of the vast body of work are to be read with each other and with the text itself. Montanari makes the argument for a contextual reading, “We will define a corpus of scholia as an exegetic corpus variorum, designed to be made up in an orderly way alongside or around the text commented upon.”[12] Scholia that appear together should be read together and not necessarily as separate registers. As Montanari suggests, the ancient critics were working with a particular instantiation of the text, both of the work and of the scholiastic/ glossographic material.


Traditional scholarship on scholia and generally scholiastic material has tended to separate the scholia both from each other and from their context. To some degree, this decision has been a practical one. A scholar can only work on so much, so choices must be made. Access to the primary sources has been limited, so producing a readable text, again, requires certain pieces to be the focus of study. Composite texts of scholia, such as the editions of Hartmut Erbse and Helmut van Thiel, have offered access to texts culled from a spectrum of manuscripts that otherwise would have been inaccessible to all but the most advanced scholars.[13] The traditional approach is not, however, without problem. The approach treats scholia as stable texts, so that spurious material is winnowed out. Because the ultimate point of these texts were as commentaries and reading aids, they were susceptible, more than other texts, to introductions and subtractions, based on the needs and opinions of the scribe.[14] Nonetheless, the manuscripts have not been read as artifacts, preserving one compilation of texts. The various groups of scholia are broken up based on modern analyses and classification, without much regard for the tradition of transmission.[15] The separation and re-integration create problems for proper contextual readings. The various materials are integrated on the page of manuscripts, so that they can be read together. Although the volume of text has been prohibitive in achieving this sort of Gesamtwerk, the total reading offers the scholiastic material in their optimal context. 	

Since the 1980’s there has been an increased interest in Byzantine literary diglossia.[16] A key method in discovering the range and influence of this diglossia has been to study ancillary material to literary works, including commentaries, paraphrases, and metaphrases.[17] The language of these texts falls outside of the normal bounds of the Hochsprache, Volksprache, and Schriftsprache, and as a result, they lend themselves to a different avenue of comprehending how the Greek was understood, read, and spoken as it developed in its many forms. The interest in diglossia also seems to call for a more contextual reading. These texts would have been read as they appear in situ, and not rearranged into neat divisions. To appreciate fully how a highly literate audience would read their language, it is necessary to read the texts right as they appear and appreciate the manuscripts as snapshots of those particular periods.

 
Sources


Although the commentary material falls into several strains, this paper compares a set of lexical glosses, the definitions given in the Lexicon Homericum of Apollonius Sophistes, and the paraphrase of Michael Psellos.[18] The lexical glosses present some of the oldest commentary on the Iliad, especially in the form of glosses or Worterklärungen.[19]  The last recension of those texts is supposed to have occurred sometime in the tenth century, according to Ernst Maas,[20] so the scholia, as they stand now, comprise a text coming only decades before the paraphrase. Of course, ultimately, this must be a speculative date because the material comes from a composite text. The interlinear glosses from the Marciana 454, Allen’s Venetus A, are here as a point of comparison. Because these glosses come from a tenth century manuscript, composed in Constantinople, and represent a compendium of some the most extensive commentary available, it was reasonable to use this as a point of comparison. Because the manuscript’s commentary is so extensive, it would contain the most necessary, but the most comprehensive, explanatory notes.[21] The Lexicon of Apollonius Sophistes, which dates from the first century AD,[22] exists in a single manuscript, the Coislin 345, dating from the tenth century.[23] The paraphrase was composed sometime in the eleventh century and is attributed to the Byzantine polymath Michael Psellos and comes from the Omega Ω.I.12 (Allen’s E4, which is called in the catalogue Escorialensis graecus 513) and the Marciana 841 (Allen’s U4).[24]



Although the works of Michael Psellos have been partially published since Leo Allatius’ edition of the Diatriba in 1634, his Homeric paraphrase has never been published in full.[25]  Erwinius Wassenbergh printed an edition of books I and II of the Iliad with a paraphrase in 1783, along his edition of scholia. Following this publication, the much used paraphrase of Immanuel Bekker, based largely on the codex Parisinus 2690, was printed in 1827 as Appendix II to the Scholia in Iliadem.[26] A problem with the 1827 publication, however, is that the Parisian codex had significant gaps which were filled by using other paraphrases that were not necessarily part of the Psellos family.[27] Although Arthur Ludwich noted the issue of Bekker’s paraphrase in his 1883 Aristarchs Textkritik, it still remains the only attempt at a complete text of the Psellos paraphrase. For this paper, a transcription of book 15 of the Psellos paraphrase created from manuscript Ω.I.12 (Allen’s E4, which is called in the catalogue Escorialensis graecus 513[28]) and another from Marciana 841 have be used in place of the standard Bekker paraphrase because, as Spooner notes, Bekker diverges from Psellos.[29] The two have not been collated, but they have been used independently. Vassis also observes the differences in the texts, “The paraphrase of Rhapsodies B-E of codex stands in no agreement with the Psellos-Paraphrase.”[30] Despite this divergence, the differences are not necessarily as pronounced as such a statement might lead one to think, but it still poses some problem.
        
	
Ludwich printed around seventy lines from four different paraphrases, the Theodorus Gaza,[31] Manuel Moschopoulos, Psellos, and Venetus A, in order to determine their relation.[32] In his analysis, he determined that they all share important commonalities and that the Psellos paraphrase holds the earliest date of composition. While Psellos is the oldest, Ludwich maintains that all four come from a pre-existing body of glosses because ultimately the corpus he reviewed is larger than all the known redactions of the Psellos paraphrase.[33] He proposes further, “they belonged in the past to an older (now lost) forerunning Homer-translation, which the compiler of the scholia vulgata excerpted.”[34] Vassis alternatively suggests that the part of the Bekker paraphrase B-E was “supra-glossed” from D.[35] Spooner suggests that books B-E of Bekker’s paraphrase, which he uses as his text for Psellos, are closer to the D-scholia because they are not part of the Psellos tradition.[36] It is not entirely evident how he arrives at this conclusion because the Psellos paraphrase is remarkably similar to the D-scholia, both in what it glosses and what it lacks. It seems that he does go too far in his differentiation of the two texts. Regardless of Spooner’s conclusion about their similarity, his clear observation that Bekker’s text is a composite, with parts from texts other than that of Psellos, provides reason to base this comparison on a newly prepared text.


The number of paraphrases over such a span of time suggests that there was something beyond a purely pragmatic purpose for the texts. That each of the paraphrases was composed by someone who was a scholar in his own right leads one to believe that it was at least a learned exercise, similar to the fact in the modern day that many major Classical scholars publish their own translations of ancient texts. Their proliferation also leads one to believe that they were popular enough to continue to be included even as they were superseded. That is to say, for example, that the Psellos paraphrase continues to be included in manuscripts even after the paraphrase, taking from several different strains and traditions.


The Homeric Lexicon of Apollonius Sophistes serves as the “key source of information on ancient understandings of Homer’s vocabulary and how Homer was read in antiquity.”[37] The main text used is that, again, of Immanuel Bekker from 1833. His edition is based on the single surviving manuscript of the Lexicon, Coislinianus 345, which is in fact an epitome of the text. Various papyri have since been found and published, the largest of which was edited by Albert Henrichs and Wolfgang Müller in 1976. Reference is also made to the lexicon of Hesychius, from the fifth or sixth century, because it preserves some citations and glosses lost elsewhere.[38] The manuscript Coislin 345 is a complete reference book. It holds in addition to the Homeric lexicon, lexica to the Septuagint, Herodotus, and Lycophron.


The D-scholia or scholia vulgata, rather than a precisely defined and intentional publication, are a Byzantine compilation that encompasses many forms of Homeric scholia.[39] The chief among them are word glosses and mythological scholia which are taken from various lexica, the so-called glossographoi, and other lexical commentaries. Henrichs determines their defining characteristic to be the “undemanding simplicity of their explanations.”[40] They appear frequently as interlinear glosses, as is seen especially in the Marciana 454, Allen’s Venetus A.[41]  As a result, Wilhelm Dindorf does include them in his edition of the scholia vetera where he names them interlinearia glossemata, interlinear glosses. Within this paper, Dindorf’s notion of interlinear glosses will be used rather than the traditional “D-scholia” denomination. The definition for D-scholia can be somewhat circular. To reduce it, they are D-scholia because they contain the information expected to be in D-scholia. Rather than enter anymore into this debate, the physical definition of Dindorf will be used because it has direct and obvious manuscript attestation. The use of Dindorf’s appellation does not detract substantially from the size of corpora compared.  


The D-scholia have been subject to criticism because they are a less homogenous set than other glossographic materials and because their collection was based in part on a misattribution to Didymus, the first century Homeric scholar and grammarian.[42] Van Thiel observes, “The D-Scholia of the manuscripts are a collection of disparate elements.”[43] He includes Worterklärungen from the first century B.C. to the fifth century A.D.; the mythographic Historiai; hypotheses; paraphrases; philological and exegetical scholia; and other specialized explanations. Van Thiel presents seven manuscripts which hold the D-scholia, while never exactly explaining why it these that he considers correct exempla. Nevertheless, that set of scholia does provide a common and widespread mode of understanding the reception and interpretation of the Homeric epics, especially from the sixth century forward.[44] The last redaction of D “must be placed in the 6th century.”[45] As a result, they were excluded from Hartmut Erbse’s edition of the scholia, but they have been most extensively published by Helmut van Thiel. Because of the wide range of sources, including the Marciana 454, from which the scholia minora are drawn, it does not seem unreasonable to use that manuscript as a point of comparison of the extensiveness of the commentary and similarity of provenance to the Psellos paraphrase.


Scholars have found assigning sources to all three of these texts to be challenging. Ioannis Vassis reports from Ludwich that Psellos created his paraphrase from D-scholiastic material.[46] Forsman, the first to pose the question of sources, considered that the chief source for the Lexicon of Apollonius was a gloss collection (Glossensammlung), which was derived from the commentaries of Aristarchus,[47]  but this notion Erbse, based on a chronology of other commentators using similar texts, refutes.[48] Erbse, following Gattiker[49] and others, postulates that the scholia vulgata and the Lexicon both come from a common source under the name of Didymus that existed for a long time before the text of Apollonius.[50] According to van der Valk, Apollonius Sophistes took from Apion, so “the period between the two is too short to assume the intermediary of D. So it is more sensible that D follows Apollonius Sophistes.[51]



The text of the Lexicon Homericum is straightforward: the edition of Bekker was used. As discussed above, this text was based off of the only extant manuscript of this work of Apollonius, the Coisilianus 345, which is itself an epitome. Although new papyri have been found, none, as far as the author can tell, have anything substantial to add for this particular project. The interlinear glosses are taken directly from photographic images of the Venetus A manuscript and were compared to the edition of Dindorf.[52]


The text of the paraphrase requires a slightly more involved explanation. The two texts used come from the Codex Marcianus 841 and the Escorialensis graecus 513 (Ω.I.12). Transcriptions were made directly from photographic images of the manuscripts.[53] The Escorial manuscript is written in an eleventh century hand,[54] and the Marcianus text comes probably from the fifteenth century.[55] The paraphrases in both of these belong to what Vassis names the “second family” of the paraphrase.[56] Of the eighteen manuscripts deemed important for the reconstruction of the paraphrase text, these two represent major exempla for the second family.[57] Moreover, Ludwich states that he would have liked to have consulted the Ω.I.12 because of its early composition.[58] Ω.I.12 lacks 481; 606, and 607, and the Marciana 841 lacks 481 and 482. All seven hundred forty-six lines of book 15 are present, except for the following. According to Allen, line 15.481 lacks in the vulgate version of the text.[59]  No comment is made about the other lines.


The whole of the Coislin 345 is, in essence, a reference work. In addition to the Homeric Lexicon, there are lexica to Herodotus, the Alexandria of Lycophron, and the Bible. As result, the work in the manuscript is situated as a reference text, so that one can read it alone as such. It is in the context of other reference works. The entries can be read as themselves without attachment to another independent text with the manuscript or even on the same page. This is what a reference work is meant for: an external source to supply information about a germane text. Although the Coislin contains the epitome the lexicon, it is evident from the papyri and from other lexica that there would have illustrative quotations for every word.


The Marciana 841 the text of the paraphrase is aligned by the half-line, generally, to the text of the epic. Sometimes, the last line of a page will be in full. Scholia are very few in this manuscript, but those that are present lie long the edge of the manuscript and supply grammatical commentary.


In the Omega I.12, the situation is slightly more complex. In addition to the line-by-line alignment of the epic to the paraphrase, there are other scholia surrounds the texts. These tend to be typical grammatical and mytho-historical scholia. There are in some ways at least two sets: those signified by numbers and those signified by dingbat symbols. These frame the exterior of the manuscript page. In conjunction with these there are also scholia within the space of the paraphrase that comment on the text. The Omega I.12 is a “deluxe edition” of the epic, complete with scholia and paraphrase. Its quantity of material and early age make it an important source for the paraphrase.

 
Relation among Texts


The relationship among the Lexicon, scholia minora, and the paraphrase is evident from their similarity in word usage. Haslam suggests that the scholia minora are frequently connected to particular forms in particular contexts.[60] The lexical entries have also been shown to be aligned with particular usages because they take both form and meaning from the particular quotation. Within the paraphrase, however, the words take the form from its usage in the text. Because the glosses are linked to particular positions, differences among the individual glosses, the Lexicon, and the paraphrase for the same word at the same point offers insight into a parallel and alternative nuance.  Because the Lexicon and interlinear glosses are traditionally linked to their particular location in the text, a close reading of the paraphrase is critical not only for where the other two sources exist, but even more so for where they do not because it proposes the connotation of the word in every line and context.


Ultimately the paraphrase presents the text of the Iliad in prose. Although difficult or uncommon words are glossed in the D-scholia, both the glossed and un-glossed words form part of the prose text. Generally, the order of the line is preserved, and most often the same particles are also maintained.[61] In these cases, the changes to the original vocabulary are minimal, and they are in fact not even noted in the Lexicon or glosses. When one compares the text of the paraphrase to that of the Iliad itself, one sees that the word choice can remain largely the same.
This can be seen, for example, in a comparison of the first fifteen lines of the book.

Paraphrase: ἐπειδὴ δὲ τούς τε σκόλοπας καὶ τὴν τάφρον διέβησαν

Iliad: αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ διά τε σκόλοπας καὶ τάφρον ἔβησαν

P: φεύγοντες· πολλοὶ δὲ ἀπέθανον ὑπὸ ταῖς τῶν ἑλλήνων χερσὶν

I: φεύγοντες, πολλοὶ δὲ δάμεν Δαναῶν ὑπὸ χερσίν,

P: οὗτοι μὲν παρὰ τοῖς ἅρμασι κατείχοντο προς μένοντες

I: οἳ μὲν δὴ παρ᾽ ὄχεσφιν ἐρητύοντο μένοντες

P: χλωροὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ δέους ἐκπεπληγμένοι· ἀνέστη δὲ ὁ ζεὺς

I: χλωροὶ ὑπαὶ δείους πεφοβημένοι: ἔγρετο δὲ Ζεὺς

5 P: ἐν ταῖς κορυφαῖς τῆς ἴ̈δης·περὶ τῆς χρυσοθρόνον 
ἐχουσης ἥρας

I: Ἴδης ἐν κορυφῇσι παρὰ χρυσοθρόνου Ἥρης,

P:ἀνέστη δὲ ὁρμήσας· ἐθεάσατο δὲ τοὺς τρῶας καὶ τὰς ἑλλήνας

I: στῆ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἀναΐξας, ἴδε δὲ Τρῶας καὶ Ἀχαιοὺς

P: τοὺς μὲν ταρασσομενάς τοὺς δὲ ταράσσοντας ὄπισθεν

I: τοὺς μὲν ὀρινομένους, τοὺς δὲ κλονέοντας ὄπισθεν

P:  τοὺς ἕλληνας· ἐν αὐτοῖς δὲ ποσειδῶνα τὸν βασιλέα·

I: Ἀργείους, μετὰ δέ σφι Ποσειδάωνα ἄνακτα:

P: τὸν δὲ ἕκτορα εἶδεν ἐν τῆ πεδιάδι κείμενον. περὶ αὐτὸν 
δὲ οἱ φίλοι

I: Ἕκτορα δ᾽ ἐν πεδίῳ ἴδε κείμενον, ἀμφὶ δ᾽ ἑταῖροι

10 P: ἐκάθηντο· οὗτος δὲ ὑπὸ ἄσθματι χαλεπων συνείχετο τὴν ψυχὴν ἐξεστηκὼς

I: εἵαθ᾽, ὃ δ᾽ ἀργαλέῳ ἔχετ᾽ ἄσθματι κῆρ ἀπινύσσων

P: αἷμα ἐμῶν· ἐπειδὴ οὐδαμῶς αὐτὸν ὁ ἀσθενέστατος ἔτρωσε τῶν ἑλλήνων·

I: αἷμ᾽ ἐμέων, ἐπεὶ οὔ μιν ἀφαυρότατος βάλ᾽ Ἀχαιῶν.

P: τοῦτον δὲ ἰ̈δὼν ἠλεησεν ὁ πατὴρ τῶν τε θεῶν καὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν

I: τὸν δὲ ἰδὼν ἐλέησε πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε,

P: δεινῶς δὲ καὶ δραστικῶς  ὑ̈πιδὼν πρὸς τὴν ἥραν λόγον εἶπεν·

I: δεινὰ δ᾽ ὑπόδρα ἰδὼν Ἥρην πρὸς μῦθον ἔειπεν:

P: ὄντως δὴ λίαν ὁ ἐπὶ κακῶς τέχνασμενος σὸς δόλος κακομηχανή ἥρα

I: ‘ἦ μάλα δὴ κακότεχνος ἀμήχανε σὸς δόλος Ἥρη

15 P: τὸν ἔνδοξον ἕκτορα τοῦ πολέμοῦ ἔπαυσε καὶ εἰς φυγὴν ἔτρεψε τοὺς λαοὺς

I: Ἕκτορα δῖον ἔπαυσε μάχης, ἐφόβησε δὲ λαούς.


It is typical for the articles to be added before the nouns, and it is not uncommon for αὐτάρ to be transformed to δέ.[62] Here, as is frequent, the major content words remain unchanged. Fittingly enough, these lines, too, do not receive glosses in the D-scholia. The predilection to maintain word order and vocabulary does suggest the origin of these texts as reading aids.


In certain instances, the Lexicon defines a single word multiple times with various synonyms. In line 15.2, δάμεν is given in the paraphrase by ἀπέθανον[63] and then in 15.476,  the Homeric δαμασσάμενοί becomes καταπονήσαντες.[64] The Lexicon glosses this Homeric verb at three entries, twice as δεδμήατο and once as δμῶες.[65] The glosses offered are ὑποτεταγμένοι, κατεσκεύαστο; κατεσκευομένοι; and ὑποτετάχθαι. Furthermore, the entry in the Lexicon of Hesychius, which often preserves glosses lost in the Coisilianus epitome, still does not present the Psellos gloss. Earlier in the Marciana 454, ἀνῃρέθησαν, which seems to offer senses of both verbs, is used.[66] The change in the gloss in the paraphrase offers a stronger difference because of the similarity between the rest of the original epic line and the paraphrase. Although they are clearly synonymous, the maintenance of the single gloss throughout the text is suggestive of the conservative nature of the glosses. The stark difference between the two suggests the importance in nuance offered by a reading inclusive of the paraphrases, even and especially where it diverges from the standard gloss of a word or line.


One of the most striking divergences occurs in the different glosses for the various forms of the verb φοβέομαι. This verb gives difficulty because its Homeric meaning is “to flee,” while by the Classical period it means to “to fear.”[67] At all of its appearances in the Marciana 454, it receives a gloss derived from either φεύγω or διώκω.[68] It also receives the phrase εἰς φυγὴν ἐτράπησαν, which appears in the paraphrase at 15.15. The Lexicon as well defines φόβος with φυγῆς.[69] When it appears in the Psellos paraphrase, however, it is defined first ἐκπεπληγμένοι in line 15.4 and then εἰς τὴν φυγὴν ἔτρεψε in line 15.15. At line 15.637, as is common throughout the text of the paraphrase, ἐφοβήθησαν is used as a gloss of ἐφόβηθεν. The word, changed for syntax, is used to gloss itself. This does perhaps suggest the tendency, especially of Apollonius, to fit the archaic word into its contemporary meaning.[70] Because of the partial adherence to the seemingly standard stock of glosses, the use of ἐκπεπληγμένοι at 15.4 offers a different view, which is not supplied elsewhere. Even Hesychius, who offers additions to the Lexicon, offers nothing else.[71] The meaning in the paraphrase here preserves the notion of fright, so it seems that at this particular point it is suggested that the meaning of the verb actually does have its later sense that does appear elsewhere.


In the Marciana 454 book 15, ἐείσατο is glossed twice with the same verb, first as ἐπῆλθεν, then as ἐπῆλθον.[72]  Since they are glossed using the same verb in different contexts, it is evidently the standard gloss and not just a simple indication of one meaning. The paraphrase, in contradistinction, does not use ἔπηλθον, but uses φάνη and ὥρμησαν, respectively, to explicate the Homeric word. Both of these are used elsewhere as interlinear glosses and in particular 1t 2.215. The close correspondence elsewhere throughout the text strongly suggests here that an important alternative understanding exists to a richer comprehension of the text.[73] The Lexicon attests the meaning of ἐφάνη by giving the exemplum from 2.215, “ἀλλ᾽ ὅ τι οἱ εἴσαιτο γελοίϊον Ἀργείοισιν.”[74] The testimony of the Lexicon, taken with other pieces of textual evidence, does suggests that the mutations found in the paraphrase are not entirely invented, but still preserve part of the glossographic tradition from other branches. For Apollonius, ἐείσατο seems to have been an exceptionally difficult word because he offers four separate glosses for the same lexis.


In line 15.104, the paraphrase offers ὀργιζόμεθα in place of μενεαίνομεν. The Marciana 454 present both ὀργιζόμεθα and προθυμούμεθα.[75]  The Lexicon concurs by offering προθυμούμεθα, which is also the gloss offered in the Marciana 454 manuscript in its interlinear gloss.[76] The difference suggests an intentional choice that Psellos made in creating the paraphrase. Although the majority holds one reading, the Venetus A is an exceptionally important text for the preservation of the common text and reading. As a result, it is important to take note of divergences between it and other readings.[77]


Glosses are frequently noted for particular lexical instances, as noted earlier, and, as a result, they tend to maintain a strong attachment to these words. In the case of γνωτόν, in every other discernible instance, it appears with a form of the gloss ἀδελφόν, and this strong connection is maintained even in the Lexicon wherein again the signification of ἀδελφόν is given, even though it cites the passage 15.350, where a significant difference lies in the paraphrase.[78] Hesychius even offers nothing else new for the matter of this word. The paraphrase offers a distinctly vastly different reading of the text, however. Here the text reads συγγενές καὶ συγγενίδες, which clearly presents a more general understanding of the word because this permits for the wider understanding of ἀδελφόν as simply “kinsfolk,” not particularly as brother and then in feminine, sister. Even though the Lexicon cites the passage in 15 as an example of the plural in different genders, only in the paraphrase do both receive a gloss. It is especially significant that this passage is cited because it is the only place in the Iliad where both genders appear together and in the plural.[79]  Further, earlier in the book γνωτόν was indeed glossed as ἀδελφόν, so the connection between the texts is clearly established. The marked change suggests that the composer of the paraphrase understood an additional stratum of text that was not previously present.


Common words, as suggested earlier, provide the opportunity to look comparatively at the usage of glosses. The verb ἀμείβετο appears five times in book 15 alone, and it receives a gloss of some form of either ἀποκρίνω or ἀνταποκρίνω in each instance, except for the last, at which it receives ὑπαλλάσσει.[80] The Lexicon is consonant with this final usage and offers two different glosses, ἀνταποδιδόναι and ἐναλλάσσειν , the latter of which is clearly related to the paraphrase’s gloss closely.[81] The choice here demonstrates the fact that glosses are linked to particular usages because it offers the less frequent meaning of the lexis. As a result, reading the paraphrase together with the other two commentaries is of especial benefit here. If it were not, the more usual sense of a verbal, rather than physical, exchange could be obscured.	

 
Textual Analysis


Fisher reports that “Gudeman criticized Planudes’ slavish adherence to the sense and word order of the original Latin text beyond the possibilities and coherence in Greek.”[82] From her perspective, Planudes “preserves the sentence boundaries of the Latin original.”[83] Other syntactic and stylistic concerns arise because of the interlingual nature of the translation between Latin and Greek, but the principle of syntactical and lexical alignment remains the same even in this thirteenth century case. The later age of course makes this example purely analogous, but it helps to suggest that  syntactic alignment was used even for high-level, prose translation. Indeed, Planudes kept the syntax so close that, as Gudeman gripes, it tested the bounds of Greek intelligibility. The comparison also fails to be perfect because, as Fisher makes evident, there are some evident rhetorical flourishes, which may or may not be entirely present in Psellos. Even still, Planudes’ text was meant to be an independent text.[84] 


Although the so-called verbum e verbo style of translation existed long before Biblical translation, it has been suggested that reverence for the Sacred Scripture played a role in expanding the use of the word-for-word style. Brock notes that classical authors including Cicero and Horace make it quite evident that they have chosen to use the sensus de sensu method.[85] He observes that “owing to the prestige of this ideal of literal biblical translation, it eventually became the norm for virtually all translation from Greek into Latin until the Renaissance.”[86] Previously the literal method was reserved for legal documents and other similar things. Again, these observations form an imperfect comparison because they concern inter- as opposed to intra- lingual translations, but they continue to establish the milieu in which the paraphrases arose.


The syntactical and lexical closeness within the intralingual translation of Psellos presents perhaps a constituent of the theories and notions mentioned above. There may have been a “reverence” for the text that was not to be diminished, yet even within this respect there was the possibility of individual, authorial expression that creates a literary contribution. Because of the lack of previous study, the historical milieu must provide the greater part of the critical lens. After the Bible, the Iliad attests the greatest number of manuscripts. As a result, one can surmise that it was a widely read and likely much revered text, so applying the argument from Scriptural “sanctity” may not be too far off of the mark. One then can appreciate the goal of the task: both to preserve a text and to introduce it in a new linguistic idiom.


The examination can begin with compound adjectives. The rationale for this lies in the fact that these convey notions often linked directly to the particular text, e.g, stock epithets.

The term “paraphrase” is used throughout this paper to describe the text being discussed. It serves both as a genre and as the title of the work. In the manuscript tradition, when there is an attribution to the text, it is entitled the “The Paraphrase of the Iliad of Michael Psellos.”[87] Although this word has a slightly different connotation in English, the fact remains that this is how it was named in its source. The term “metaphrase” is also use to describe essentially the same genre, especially for other works. The scholarly tradition for the Iliadic genre has kept using “paraphrase,” so in that tradition the same is used here.   

The language of the Psellos paraphrases differs from the standard language of other texts. In addition to being a Byzantine product with Hellenistic origins commenting on a Homeric text, the nature of the paraphrastic language in general requires special considerations. Davis observes, “Broadly speaking, these texts endeavor to recast in a simpler linguistic register the information given in their sources: inevitably, therefore, a considerable proportion though not all of the rhetorical wealth and subtlety of the originals is reduced or omitted.”[88] Davis goes further, “The overall quality that distinguishes them [paraphrases] is this radical simplification of the original text.”[89] Part of the nature of the paraphrase is to re-word in more current vocabulary and simpler syntax the text of the epic. As far the language itself of the paraphrase goes, it is “termed very studiedly by Eideneier (subsequently adopted by Herbert Hunger) as a ‘Schrift-Koine.’ The metaphrases, in effect, are instances of what is known as intralingual translation… but from one form or register of the language into another form or register of the same language.”[90] The goal is to render the Homeric Kunstsprache into a more common form of the language. This is essentially analogous to a contemporary rendering of the Canterbury Tales. The observations in this paper offer just a very small snippet of what may be said about the text. Nevertheless, it true that “there is much one can talk about in any extract of the metaphrase; here we can note a number of changes that can be seen to recur throughout the entire metaphrase.” [91] A part of the text is largely representative of major trends, so that even if the specific verb or phrase differs, the guiding principle remains constant.


A great number of the words are not in fact changed from the original poem to the prose paraphrase. Generally, it appears that only the “unusual poetic words [are translated] into more common ones.”[92] This notion tends to be true, so changes and differences in the glosses prove to be all the more significant. Individual glosses have obvious value, but “the paraphrase remains important because...it [the style of the text] was still much more complex than the Koine, and so it needed explanation.”[93] The continuous paraphrases seek not only to explicate difficult vocabulary, but also to elucidate complex syntactical units. The benefit of the paraphrase is that it gives the context of the word and provides continuity in the progression of the text.


Within the paraphrase, the different ethnic groups from the Greek peninsula, including the Achaeans, Danaans, and Argives, are all termed “Hellenes.” Examples of this can be seen at line 15.6 and 15.44 where Ἀχαιοὺς is given as ἑλλήνας and at 15.2 where Δαναῶν       	is rendered as ἑλλήνων. This is a phenomenon seen elsewhere, “for instance, the metaphrast consistently renders Choniates’ term ‘Perses’ with ‘Tourkoi’.”[94] The author changes the names of the groups to correspond to current idioms. Despite the names of the various Greek tribes in the epic, “Hellenes” describes all according to the political and geographic demarcations of the time. The metaphrast of Choniates’ text analogously changed the ethnicity of the group to correspond to a contemporary enemy.


The first appears at line 15.5, παρὰ χρυσοθρόνου Ἥρης, 
which is given as περὶ τῆς χρυσοθρόνον ἐχουσης ἥρας, in the paraphrase. This epithet appears a total of four times in the *Iliad*.[95] The question of prepositions aside for the moment,[96] the extra participle is inserted while the adjective remains the same. One might speculate that the addition of the participle makes clear that Hera possesses a golden throne, rather than is herself in some way similar to a golden throne.


The pattern of making the action of the adjective evident continues. In 15.14 one sees first the adjective κακότεχνος, which is translated as κακῶς τέχνασμενος. Rather than Hera being herself craftily-contrived, she in fact *does* the crafty contriving. While this may seem to be too evident to make the distinction, the precision of the translation does suggest that the text does mean (as much as a text can intend to do anything) convey the complete sense of the text. That is, reproducing the sense of the text takes pre-eminence over creating a word-for-word equivalence. Hera is next described as *ἀμήχανε* which the paraphrase gives as κακομηχανή. This is also the gloss which is supplied in the *Lexicon Homericum*. The sense, as the author takes it, differs somewhat from the definition given in Liddell-Scott-Jones, which offers, "against whom or which nothing can be done, irresistible."[97] The sense, it seems, in the Byzantine text brings out the notion of "evil planning" or "cunningly-wiled," rather than "impossible to plan against." Even still, it avoids the meaning of "plan-less." 


The change at 15.30 presents a slightly different case. The notion of *ἱππόβοτον*, "horse-grazing" becomes *ἱππότροφον*, "horse-raising." Again, this continues the known trend of directing the action of the adjective to its appropriate agent. The piece of land neither grazing in the manner of cattle nor does it graze on cattle. At the same place a change of noun also occurs. In the epic Zeus asserts that he brought Herakles back to Argos, but in the paraphrase, it is rendered as the Peloponnese. Changes such as this occur elsewhere, in the manner of naming all of the warriors from various regions of Greece "Hellenes."[98] Pindar refers to Argos as *ἱππότροφος* in Nemean Ode 10.41. While the adjective is doubtless fitting, one still needs to wonder about the change of place. Is one to assume that an eleventh century Byzantine reader needed to told that Argos is on the Peloponnese? Perhaps so.

Descriptions of Hera continue to raise questions. At lines 15.34 and 15.49, the goddess is referred to as *βοῶπις πότνια*. In both cases, the paraphrase gives *πότνια* as *σεβασμὶα,* but it gives two different glosses for *βοῶπις*, *μεγαλόφθαλμος* in 15.34 and *εὐόφθαλμε* in 15.49.[99] If one compares the use of *εὐ-* in this instance with its use in others, one can notice that the prefix is sometimes used as intensifier, as in 15.113 *θαλερὼ* as *εὐθαλεῖς* or 15.621 *τροφόεντα* as *εὐτραφῆ*. Or, even, it can replace another intensifying prefix, as in the case of 15.550 *μετέπρεπε* as *εὐτρεπὴς*. The comparanda are not perfect, but they begin to approach the possibilities in meaning. *μεγαλό-* seems natural as a replace for cow-like eye.[100]

The same word, *μεγαλόφθαλμον*, for *εὐρύοπα* is given at 15.152 when describing the "son of Cronus." The other occurrence of this word at 15.724 the gloss gives *μεγαλόφωνος,* "loud-voiced." The stark difference in meaning is incredibly suggestive. The word, according to the Liddell-Scott-Jones, has a second folk etymology from the Greeks, "Derived by the Greeks from ὄπ-, ὄψομαι, wide-eyed (cf. ἥλιος εὐ. Orph.L.701) or from ὄπ- 'voice' (cf. ϝέπος, ὄψ (A), vox), far-sounding, i.e. thundering (cf. “χορὸς εὐρύοπα κέλαδον φθεγγόμενος” Lyr.Adesp.93, cf. Sch. Il.1.498)".[101] The compiler of the paraphrase is clearly aware of both etymologies and supplies both, at different times. Again, as one sees in the case of the "winged-words," there is a clear awareness of the multivalent character of the diction, and there is an attempt to make those resonances evident. The awareness of the different resonances raises an interesting question about the problem of constructing a gloss in general. In a lexicon, one has the luxury of listing every meaning and as a result one becomes aware all of the possibilities. In a gloss, however, and especially one that tries to remain aligned with the text, one can only present one reading at a time. Evidently this fact is compensated for, to some degree, by the use the multiple different possibilities.


The variation in translation, as the following example hopes to suggest, may just be that: literary variatio. In translating the phrase *ἔπεα πτερόεντα προσηύδα*, the paraphrase gives three possibilities *λόγους ἐπτερωμένους* at 15.35, λόγους ταχεῖς at 15.48,15.145, and 15.157, and a combination of the two, λόγους ταχεῖς καὶ ἐπτερωμένους, at 15.89. What can be made of this? On the one hand, one may speculate that there is a certain discomfort or ill-fit in translating the *πτερόεντα* strictly with *ταχεῖς* because, as no lack of scholarship suggests, the words are more than just swiftly-winged. The cognate, then, becomes the best translation. One, of course, notices that the action of the adjective was transferred onto the noun, the words are flying. In this, both the literal image of the winged, read flying, words is preserved, while still giving *a* sense of the symbol, if not *the* only sense. Then, the usages of the three different forms may indicate the possible literary nature of the text.

The translation of *χαλκοχιτώνων* as *σιδηροθωρακῶν* at 15.56 gives a thoroughly intriguing instance of the translation for sense rather than for literal verisimilitude. The Byzantine soldier would not have been wearing bronze armor, and it would have been a breastplate, *θώραξ*, not a shirt, *χιτών*. The change of metal clarifies with a relative level of certainty that a similarity of sense is sought because of the advances and shifts in martial technology. *χαλκοχιτώνων* also occurs at 15.330 in Allen's text, but in the paraphrase the gloss of *καρτεροψύχων* is given, which suggests the text this is based off of had the variant reading given by Allen, *καρτερόθυμος*[102] This is also the reading in the Omega I.12. It is also worth noting that here *βοιωτῶν* is given for *βοιωτῶν*.[103]


Oftentimes there are forms that fall out of common usage, and these too are updated. At 15.77, Achilles is described as *πτολίπορθον*, "city-sacking," is transformed in *τὸν τὰς πόλεις πορθοῦντα*. First it is clear that the form of "city" put into the common orthography, and then it is evident that the active adjective is again transformed into a participle with a nominal object.


In the edition of Allen, the canonical line 15.745 reads, "τὸν δ᾽ Αἴας οὔτασκε δεδεγμένος ἔγχεϊ μακρῷ," but the apparatus criticus offers two alternate readings, "ὀξέϊ χαλκῷ" and "ὀξέϊ δουρί." The paraphrase at this line reads "ὁξεῖ σιδήρῳ." Other instances of ἔγχος are rendered with some form of δόρυ (cf. lines 65, 126, 278, 386, 482, 536, 712, and 742), so one may surmise that this is not the reading of the Iliadic text with which Psellos was working. Based other renderings of the paraphrase, one may opine that the reading was likely ὀξέϊ χαλκῷ because χαλκός, bronze, is consistently rendered with σίδηρος, iron.[104]  The adjective πολεμικὸν is used at 15.221 for χαλκοκορυστήν and 15.458 εὐοπλω. Again, these do suggest that the sense of the word and what action it conveys are of greater importance than literal exactitude. When Hector, for they both times describe the great tamer of horses, possesses the brazen arms, he is warlike and well-equipped. Then again he is εὔοπλος when he possesses the κορυθαίολος.
 
At two points, 15.669 and 15.741, in the text, the word φόως is rendered with σωτηρία. Although Aristarchus athetizes lines 15.668-15.673, there is no variance in this reading of the lines, as recorded by Allen. The four lines, two from the epic and their renderings in the paraphrase, are reproduced in full below.

Iliad             	669 θεσπέσιον: μάλα δέ σφι φόως γένετ᾽ ἀμφοτέρωθεν

Paraphrase   	669 τὸ μέγα· πάνυ δὲ αὐτοῖς σωτηρία ἐγένετο ἀμφοτέρωθεν

I                   	741 τὼ ἐν χερσὶ φόως, οὐ μειλιχίῃ πολέμοιο.

P                  	741 διὸ ἐν ταῖς χερσιν ἠμῶν τη τῷ μάχεσθαι ἡ σωτηρία; οὐκ ἐν τῷ πράους εἶναι                         	        	ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ

The Liddell, Scott, Jones offers the definition, "light, as a metaphor for deliverance, happiness, victory, glory, etc." and cites 15.741 as an illustrative example. While the meaning of φόως as "deliverance," then, is nothing unknown or surprising, the fact that σωτηρία is the word used is suggestive. In later Greek, especially in the Patristic and Byzantine periods, φόως takes on a markedly Christian metaphorical meaning, including moral illumination, the light of the kingdom, and Gnostic emanations.[105] The word σωτηρία, again, obviously makes sense as a translation because it would have been a very familiar word, since it is found throughout religious tracts discussing the Christian salvation. For precisely this reason, however, the powerful Christological overtones make it an intriguing choice.


The understanding of the body in Homeric verses poses an interesting question. Bruno Snell suggests, based off of the textual and archaeological (vase drawings especially)the understanding, at least artistically, of the human body was of a collection of parts, rather than a totality or a whole.[106] As this understanding changed, it is especially interesting to consider how the choice of glosses reflects this changed in conceptualization. In  15.87 Thetis garners the appellation, *καλλιπαρῄῳ*, "beautiful-cheeked," which is given in the paraphrase as *ἐυπροσώπου*, "beautiful-faced."[107] Here, the part is taken as referential to the whole. It may indeed be the case, but, as in the case of the "ox-eyed" Hera, one comes to consider what it is about these notions of beauty that do not necessarily come across literally, but notionally.
 
From the original text to the paraphrase, there is an interesting reversal in words. At 15.135 ὑπερθύμους  is rendered as  μεγαλοψύχους. A similar change happens at 15.330, where one reads καρτεροψύχων, which must translate καρτερόθυμος.[108] The second example is of particular interest because it is, according to Allen, a variant for the line. The canonical reading stands as χαλκοχιτώνων. This example illustrates also the historical importance the paraphrases have for Textkritik because they help to indicate with which text of the Iliad the author of the paraphrase would have had to work.[109] Elsewhere, ψυχή is rendered as θυμός.[110]At 15.253, the canonical reads goes, ἄναξ ἑκάεργος Ἀπόλλων. This epithet appears also at 15.243, where it is rendered as ὁ μακρόβολος ἀπόλλων. At 15.253, however, the line reads ὁ τοῦ διὸς υἱὸς βασιλεὺς ἀπόλλων. The second paraphrase seems, rather, to render what Allen cites as  variant, ἄναξ διὸς υἱὸς ἀπόλλων. Although these variants help to establish the fact that the text used by the paraphraser, they do not point to clear source, at least as far as one can tell from Allen’s critical apparatus. The variant at 15.330 appears in M8 N4 V10 V12 V13; at 15.253 the variant occurs in b c f C V32; and the alternate reading at 15.745 shows in c d h l q C al. Even if trying to find the original manuscript source may be a bit of a fool’s errand, the occurrence and maintenance of these variants do point to the fact that Allen’s text was not always the text.


When Arthur Ludwich contended that the D-scholia and paraphrase each represent a branch of an Ur-source, bifurcated around the tenth century,[111] he moved forward the notion of the intimate relation between these commentary texts. This paper has tried to demonstrate that this relation provides more than a continuous replication, but also offers a parallel and sometime alternative understanding of the text.[112] The paraphrase genre arose in order to facilitate the widespread reading of a text that was in a style and language that had become increasingly more challenging.[113] The derivation and genre of the paraphrase necessitated the differences in vocabulary, which represent more closely the nuances in the text. Although the paraphrases represent the longer glossographic tradition, they also form their own literary genre.  They required variation and explication of the text not needed in the lexical reading aids of the scholia. The lexeis of the text help to illustrate a certain style and theory of translation in antiquity. Even though the style of translation is similar to that found in educational texts, it cannot be undervalued. The paraphrase’s inclusion in the artifacts meant for a higher level audience suggests stronger that they were in fact intended for those who could understand a higher register.[114] This paraphrase and others like it cannot be undervalued precisely because of their differences from the standard lexical commentaries. These variants give important clarification to distinctions that are lost or obscured in other parts of the glossographic tradition.

 
Bibliography

Allen, T.W. “Notes upon Greek Manuscripts in Italian Libraries.” The Classical Review. Vol. 3,    No. 1/2 (Feb., 1889), pp. 12-22.

Allen, T.W. “On the Composition of Some Greek Manuscripts.” The Journal of Philology,        	volume 22. MacMillan: Cambridge, 1894.

Apollonius Sophistes. Lexicon Homericum. Ed. Immanuel Bekker. Berlin: Reimer, 1833.

Bakker, Egbert. Companion to the Ancient Greek Language. 
“Byzantine Literature and the       	Classical Past.”  Staffan Wahlgren. Wiley-Blackwell: Hoboken, 2010. 528-538.

Bekker, Immanuel. Scholiorum in Homeri Iliadem Appendix. Berlin: Reimer, 1827.

Blomqvist, Jerker. Greek Particles in Hellenistic Prose. Berlingska Boktryckeriet, Lund 1969.

Brock, Sebastian. “Aspects of Translation Technique in Antiquity.” Greek, Roman, and    Byzantine Studies. October, 1978. 69-87.         	http://grbs.library.duke.edu/article/view/7281/4949.

Davis, John. “Anna Komnene and Niketas Choniates ‘translated’: the fourteenth-century Byzantine metaphrases.” History as Literature in Byzantium: Papers from the fortieth         	spring symposium of Byzantine studies. Ed. Macrides, Ruth. University of Birmingham, April 2007. Burlington: Ashgate, 2010. 55-73.

Dickey, Eleanor. Ancient Greek Scholarship. Oxford: University Press, 2007.

Dickey, Eleanor, ed. Colloquia of the Hermeneumata Pseudodositheana Vol. 1 : Colloquia        	Monacensia-Einsidlensia, Leidense-Stephani, and Stephani. New York, NY, USA:     	Cambridge University Press, 2012. ProQuest ebrary. Web. 8 May 2015.

Erbse, Hartmut. Beiträge zum Ueberlieferung der Iliasscholien. Munich: Beck, 1960.

Fisher, Elizabeth A. Planudes’ Greek Translation of Ovid’s Metamorphoses. New York:    Garland, 1990.

Forsman, Carolus. De Aristarcho Lexici Apolloniani fonte. Helsingforsiae: J.C. Frenckelii, 1883.

Gattiker, Hans. Das Verhältnis des Homerlexikons des Apollonios Sophistes zu den        	Homerscholien. Zurich: Leeman & co., 1945.

Haslam, Michael. “The Homer Lexicon of Apollonius Sophistes I. Composition and      	Constituents.” Classical Philology 89.1 (1994).1-45.

Haslam, Michael . “The Homer Lexicon of Apollonius 
Sophistes II. Identity and Transmission.”   Classical Philology 89.2 (1994). 107-118.

Haslam, Michael. “Homeric readings lost and found.” Classical Philology 87.4 (1992). 322-325.

Haslam, Michael. “A new papyrus text of Apollonius Sophistes.” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 49, 1982, 31-88.

Henrichs, Albert. “Scholia Minor zu Homer I.” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 7      	(1971). 97-149.

Henrichs, Albert and Wolfgang Mueller. “Apollonius Sophistes Homerlexikon.” Collectanea    	Papyrologica in memory of H.C. Youtie. 1976, I. 27-51.
Hesychius. Lexicon.Ed. Mauricius Schmidt. Jena: Libraria Maukiana, 1867.

Hinterberger, Martin, Ed. The Language of Byzantine Learned Literature. Turnhout: Brepols,    	2014.
 
Hunger, Herbert. Anonyme Metaphrase zu Anna Komnene, Alexias XI-XIII. Vienna: Austrian    	Academy of Science, 1981.

Jakobson, Roman. “On the Linguistic Aspects of Translation.” The Translation Studies Reader 	2000 (ed. Lawrence Venuti).  London & New York: Routledge, 113-118.

Kappe, Friedrich. Der Bekkersche Paraphrast der Ilias und seine Bedeutung für die Textkritik.   	Liegnitz : Carl Seyffarth, 1892.
 


Lampe, G.W.H. Patristic Greek Lexicon. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1961.

Ludwich, Arthur. Aristarchs Homerische Textkritik. Aristarchs homerische Textkritik nach den  	Fragmenten des Didymos. Leipzig: Teubner, 1884.

Maniaci, Marilena. “Words within Words: Layout Strategies in Some Glossed Manuscripts of   	the Iliad.” St. Louis: St. Louis Manuscript Studies, 2005. 241-268.

Montanari, Franco and  Lara Pagani. Trends in Classics - Supplementary Volumes : From Scholars to Scholia : Chapters in the History of Ancient Greek Scholarship. Göttingen:    De Gruyter, 2011.

Moore, Paul. Iter Psellianum. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 2005.

Nikolova-Houston, Tatiana Nikolaeva. Margins and Marginality: Marginalia and Colophons in    South Slavic Manuscripts During the Ottoman Period, 1393-1878. Ann Arbor: ProQuest,       	2008.

Piltz, Anders, Johanna Akujarvi, Vassilios Sabatakakis, Karin Blomqvist, Georg Walser, Lars   	Nordgren, Edd. For Particular Reasons: Studies in Honour of Jerker Blomqvist. Lund:    	Nordic Academic Press, 2003. 	

Psaltes, Stamatios B. Grammatik Der Byzantinischen Chroniken. Goettingen: Vandenhoeck & 	Ruprecht, 1915.

Renner, Timothy. “Three New Homerica on Papyri.” Harvard Studies in Classical Philology.    	Vol. 83 (1979). 311-337. 

Robertson, A.T. Grammar of the Greek New Testament. New York: Hodder and Stoughton,    	1914.

Schironi, Francesca. “Greek Commentaries.” Dead Sea Discoveries 19 (2012). 399-441.

Snell, Bruno. The Discovery of the Mind. New York: Harper, 1960.

Sontheimer , Walther and Konrat Ziegler. Der Kleine Pauly, 
Lexikon der Antike [in 5 Bänden]  	auf der Grundlage von 
Pauly’s Realencyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft.      	Munich: Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag, 1979.

Sophocles, Evangelinus Apostolides. A glossary of later and Byzantine Greek. Cambridge:        	Welch, Bigelow, 1860.

Theseus, Nikolaos. Ilias: meta palaias paraphrasēos ex idiocheiru tu Theodoru Gazē nyn prōton    typois ekd. Hē prostithetai kai Batrachomyomachia syn tē idia paraphrasei ekd. tu deuteron, Volume 1. Karles: 1811.

Thiel, Helmut van. “Die D-Scholien der Ilias in den Handschriften.” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie    und Epigraphik 132 (2000) 1-62.

Thiel, Helmut van. Scholia D in Iliadem. Proecdosis aucta et correctior 2014. Secundum codices   manu scriptos.Elektronische Schriftenreihe der Universitäts- und Stadtbibliothek Köln, 7.       	Universitäts- und Stadtbibliothek, Köln. < http://kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/5586/>.

Valiavitcharska, Vessela. “Rhetoric in the Hands of the Byzantine Grammarian.” Rhetorica.     	31.3, 237-260. University of California: Berkeley, 2013.

Vassis, Ioannis. Die handschriftliche Überlieferung der sogenannten Psellos-Paraphrase der     	Ilias. Hamburg: 1991.


[1]Renner 311.

[2]Spooner 16 n.77. This opinion was proposed to some extent by Ludwich and continued more recently by Gattiker and by Spooner.

[3]For a longer discussion of the “Geschichte der Sammlung” see van Thiel 5-8.

[4]Vassis 11-12.

[5] See Maniaci.

[6]Wahlgren 537.

[7] Wahlgren 534.

[8]Valiavitcharska  240. 

[9]Wahlgren 527.

[10]Montanari vii, “ancient scholarship,” which flourished on account of the need to conserve, interpret and study the works of the great authors of the past: textual criticism and exegesis on the one hand (i.e. text conservation and interpretation in the strict sense) and the study of linguistic phenomena on the other (vocabulary, grammar, rhetoric).

[11] Montanari viii, What is thereby highlighted is the central importance of the relation between the library artefact and the text as an object of editing, that is to say, between on the one hand the craftsman's practices, aimed at correcting, in a copy, that which was held to be wrong (often by means of comparison with the antigraph or with other copies), and on the other hand, the rise of a philological practice seeking to emend the text of a work, in which case it was the text itself that was held to be unsatisfactory due to errors that had crept in over time and had been handed down through tradition. Finally, the framework thus reconstructed allows reflection on the nature of the readings attributed to the Alexandrian grammarians.

[12]Montanari 107.

[13]Erbse. Scholia Graeca in Homeri Iliadem, Berlin: de Gruyter, 1969–1983. Van Thiel. Scholia D in Iliadem. Cologne, 2000.

[14] Nikolova-Houston 18. The author discusses notions of “open texts” and “closed texts” and how these competing notions had influence on the additions to texts and the appearance of marginalia. Van Thiel offers a creative insight, “Die D-Scholien ähneln einem Gebäude, das über Jahrhunderte hinweg immer wieder verändert und vor allen an ihrer Geschichte, ist verwandt mit der Arbeit des Archäologen”(9).

[15] One might consider van Thiel’s edition of D-scholia, wherein both mythographic scholia and lexical glosses are included together, even though in the manuscript sources, the mythographic are included alongside the traditional scholia vetera.

[16] See Hunger Vorwort.

[17] Hunger 8, Um dieses Problem zu studieren, bieten 
einige byzantinische Bearbeitungen hochsprachlicher Werke ein vorzügliches Hilfsmittel.

[18] There is doubtless a connection between the D and the Lexicon, as observed by Gattiker 50, daß nur zwischen der D-Scholien und dem Lexikon des Apollonius ein direkter und unmittelbarer Zusammenhung besteht.” Furthermore, Henrichs considers each of these a source in his understanding of the scholia minora (101).

[19] Dickey 20.

[20] Gattiker 7.

[21] Allen 158.

[22] Der kleine Pauly 451. The one surviving manuscript of the Lexicon, the Coislianus 345, is dated to around the early tenth century (Haslam I 2). Reference is made on occasion to the later lexicon of Hesychius because preserves on occasion entries lost in the surviving manuscript of Apollonius’ text.

[23] Gattiker 16.

[24] Moore 463.

[25] Moore 9. Bekker published a text based largely on the Paris 2690, which contains an exemplum of the Psellos paraphrase, but he also took from other, non-Psellos, texts to fill the gaps, including the Catalogue of Ships. L.G. Westerink led a mid-twentieth century push to publish more of Psellos’ works the Teubner and Patrologia Graeca series.

[26] Vassis 43.

[27] Ludwich 486. “Die laut S. 811 in der Hauptsache auf dem Cod. Parisinus 2690 beruht; nur wo dieser lückenhaft ist, hat Bekker anderweitig Hilfe gesucht, z.B. für den Schiffskatalog bei Wassenbergh, der die beiden ersten Bücher der Ilias mit Paraphrase aus einer Amsterdamer Handschrift herausgegeben hatte.“ Vassis 66-69. Interestingly, this manuscript, too, lacks the Catalogue of Ships.

[28] This transcription has been prepared from images made available through the Homer Multitext Project. 

[29] Spooner 31.

[30] Vassis 1991 224. Die Paraphrase der Rhapsodien B-E von cod. G steht in keinem Zusammenhang mit der Psellos-Paraphrase.

[31] As far as the author can tell, the last edition of the Gaza paraphrase was the edition of the Theseus. He assures his reader that Gaza was a “honorable and deep man” (Theseus xvi). In his introduction, Theseus compares briefly the Gaza, Psellos, and Venetus A paraphrases.

[32] Ludwich 512.

[33] Ludwich 515-516, „sind jene Scholien auf ihrem Gebiet reichhaltiger als alle mir bekannten Redactionen der Psellos-Uebersetzung zusammengenommen.“

[34] “Sie ehemals einer älterer (jetzt verlorenen) fortlaufenden Homer-Übersetzung angehörten, die der Compilator der Vulgärscholien [D-scholia] excerpierte.”

[35] Spooner 32.

[36] Spooner 167.

[37] Dickey 25.

[38] Henrichs and Müller 28, “Der Vergleich dieser Papyri mit der Apolloniostradition im Codex Marcianus des Hesych einerseits und im Codex Coislinianus andererseits wirft neues Licht auf die frühesten Überlieferungsstufen dieses Lexikons.”

[39] Henrichs 99.

[40] Henrichs 99, “Das besondere Kennzeichen der Scholia 
Minora . . . ist die anspruchlose Schlichtheit ihrer Erklärungen: Sie bestehen im Grundstock aus Interpretamenten.”

[41] Henrichs 99-100.

[42] Henrichs 99 and 114.

[43] Van Thiel 4.

[44] See chart on Henrichs 114. He suggests that the 
scholia minora are the source for every major commentary and lexicon from the 5th BC forward. Further, he proposes that the so-called D-scholia are best considered a compilation of the scholia minora and Lexicon of Apollonius.

[45] Van der Valk 204.

[46] Vassis 11-12, Er hält es für wahrscheinlicher, daß 
Psellos aus den D-Scholien geschöpft hat, von welchen er wiederum vermutete, daß sie aus der Auflösung einer fortlaufenden, uns nicht erhaltenen Paraphrase stammen, als daß Paraphrase und Scholien auf eine gemeinsame Quelle zurückgehen.

[47] Erbse 407.

[48] Erbse 408.

[49] Although Erbse does follow Gattiker in this respect, he believes that he has fundamental flaws in his Quellenkritik, as does Forsman (Erbse 412).

[50] Gattiker 50.

[51] Van der Valk 206. For a summary of this whole debate see Haslam 1-2.

[52] These images were made available by the Homer Multitext project.

[53] Again, these were made available by the Homer Multitext project.

[54] Vassis 68.

[55] Vassis 111.

[56] Vassis 217.

[57] Vassis 181, Achtzehn Codices, d.i. die Hälfte der Hss. mit der Psellos-Paraphrase, sind, wie weiter untergezeigt wird, unabhängig voneinander entstanden und müssen als Primärzeugen für  die Rekonstruktion des ursprünglichen Textes unserer Paraphrase herangezogen werden.

[58] Ludwich 508.

[59]Allen II 66.

[60] Haslam I 29.

[61] Thanks for this point must be given to Mark de Kreij of Heidelberg, who very generously shared his notes for a talk given at Lausanne, entitled “Genavensis Gr. 44. Une comparaison linguistique entre l’Iliade et la paraphrase,” December, 2013.

[62] Cf. l. 15.45 in the paraphrase, “σοὶ δὲ καὶ ἐκείνω ἐγὼ συμβουλεύσαιμϊ” and in l. 61, “αἵτινες νῦν αὐτὸν καταπονοῦσι κατὰ τὰς διανοίας τοὺς δὲ ἕλληνας.”

[63] Line 15.2 in paraphrase, “φεύγοντες· πολλοὶ δὲ ἀπέθανον ὑπὸ ταῖς τῶν ἑλλήνων χερσὶν”

[64] Line 15.476 in paraphrase, μὴ δὴ χωρὶς κακοπαθείαν καταπονήσαντες λάβοιεν.

[65] Bekker 57, 1 and 18 and 59, 19.

[66] Dindorf 331:12.14.

[67] Liddell, Scott, Jones. 

[68] Dindorf 332:12.46; 334:12.432; 335:13:467; and 340:21.267.

[69] Bekker 164.8 “Ἀρίσταρχος σεσημείωται ὅτι συνήθως φόβος ἐπὶ τῆς φυγῆς, φύζα δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς μετὰ δειλίας φυγῆς.”

[70] Haslam I 29.

[71] Hesychius, Lexicon 1527-128. φοβεῖ· κνίζει, διώκει. “All the entries absent from the Coisilianus but present in the papyrus are present too in Hesychius, who it is known had access, whether directly or via Diogenianus, to a fuller version of Apollonius, Haslam 1982 37.

[72] O 415/Zs  ἐείσατο δὲ (Αti)ἐπῆλθεν p. 470; O 544/Zs ἐεισάσθην: νῦν ἐπῆλθον p. 472. In the paraphrase, 415: ὁ δὲ ἕκτωρ ἀντικρὺ τοῦ αἴαντος ἐφάνη τοῦ ἐν δόξου; and 544: οὗτοι μὲν ὥρμσαν τὰ σιδηρᾶ ὅπλα ἀπὸ τῶν ὤμων.

[73] Dindorf 312:2.215;319:9.545 and ;332:12.103&118.

[74] Bekker, 62.26.

[75] O 104/Z Zs p. 462.

[76] Bekker 111.9.

[77] Dindorf 321:10.101; 332:12.59; and 337:15.491.

[78] Bekker 55.12, γνωτόν ἀδελφόν. καὶ πληθυντικῶς “γνωτοί τε γνωταί τε.”

[79] At 3.174, the word appears in the masculine plural. It then appears six times in the masculine singular and once in the masculine plural.

[80] 15. 48, 92, 200, 471, 684.

[81] Bekker 24.22, ἀμείβεσθαι ἐπὶ μὲν τοῦ λόγον ἀνταποδιδόναι “ἀμείβετο φώνησέν τε,” ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ κατὰ μέρος “οἱ μὲν ἀμειβόμενοι φυλακὰς ἔχον,” ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ ἐναλλάσσειν “ὃς πρὸς Τυδείδην Διομήδεα τεύχε' ἄμειβεν.” See Hesychius 109 for comparison.

[82] Fisher 70.

[83] Fisher 76.

[84] Fisher 97.

[85] Brock 69.                                         	

[86] Brock 70.

[87] Cite Vassis.

[88] Macrides 56.

[89] Macrides 66.

[90] Macrides 56-57. For a description of “intralingual translation,” see Jakobson ‘On the Linguistic Aspects of Translation.’ Jakobson 114, “Intralingual translation or rewording is an interpretation of verbal signs by means of other signs of the same language.”

[91] Macrides 62.

[92] Schironi 412.

[93] Schironi 427.

[94] Macrides 62.

[95] Look at Bekker's paraphrase for the heck of it. 1.611, 9.533, 14.154.

[96] The placement of genitives proves to be interesting. Usually genitives proceed after their attendant noun, in the fashion "article, adjective, noun," but in some cases there is some attribution to the noun. In the case of 15.5, this may be to signify that Hera *possesses* the chair, rather that presently *performs* the act of holding it. 

[97] Cite LSJ.

[98] Cite some places maybe.

[99] The uses of the prefix εὐ-, 15.87 καλλιπαρῄῳ as εὐπροσώπου; 15.99 εὔφρων as εὐφραινόμενος; 15.113 θαλερὼ as εὐθαλεῖς; 15.153 θυόεν as εὐῶδες; 15.203 στρεπταὶ as εὐμετάτρεπτοι; 15.246,15.504 κορυθαίολος as εὔοπλος;
15.263 ἀκοστήσας as εὐτραφον; 15.362 ῥεῖα μάλ᾽ as εὐκόλως πάνυ; 15.463 ἐϋστρεφέα as εὔστροφον; 15.477 ἐϋσσέλμους as εὐκαθέδρους; 15.550 μετέπρεπε as εὐτρεπὴς; 15.621 τροφόεντα as εὐτραφῆ.

[100] There is an essay somewhere that exhorts readers of 
Homer to take seriously the fact they people are described using cattle adjectives. Was there then something "attractive" about wide-eyed cows? Does it signify health, fertility, vivacity? All the same, she is large-eyed and "well-eyed."

[101] cite LSJ.

[102] The alternative appears in AMBROSIANUS 152, NEAPOLITANUS II F I, and Vatican 10, 12, 13.

[103] It is telling that references to bronze are broadly replaced with iron, cf.15.127, *σιδηροῦν*.

[104] 65 P: δόρατι;126: δόρυ; 278: δόρασιν; 386: δόρασιν; 482: δόρυ; 536: ὀξεῖ δόρατι; 712: δόρασιν; 745: ὁξεῖ σιδήρῳ. 

[105] See Lampe 1505-1507.

[106] See Snell's fascinating discussion in his *Entdeckung des Geistes.*

[107] One can even continue to consider how *πρόσωπον* comes to mean the whole person, just *persona* in Latin does.

[108] Cf. 15.629.

[109] For a brief discussion of this fact see Kappe.

[110] Cf. 15.163.

[111] Ludwich 515-516.

[112] Kappe (4) calls for a similar study, “Sollte sich bei weiteren Verlgeichen das Resultat ergeben, dass der Text, den der Paraphrast benutzte, in wesentlichen Punkten von unserem Texte einerseits unds von den Scholien und Handschriften andererseits verschieden ist, so hätten wir unserer Paraphrase eine neue, bisher noch nicht benutzte Quelle für die Textkritik der Ilias.”

[113] Schironi 22.

[114] Hunger 19, Nun gab es zweifellos in Byzanz wie in allen Kulturstaaten zwischen der Sprache der Literatur („Hochsprache“) un der Volksprache eine mehr oder wenige „gehobene“ Umgangsprache, ueber deren Bandbreite und Verwendungsmoeglichkeiten in der Literatur zunaechst fast nichts bekannt ist.
