I.	Introduction
The finish of this paper is not yet certain, but the process and general goal are to compare Byzantine paraphrases of the Iliad, particularly books I and XV, among each other and with the scholia minora/vulgata, or the interlinear glosses and to discern connections or relationships among them. The manuscripts to be investigated are Marciana 454, Marciana 841, Escorial Ω.I.12, and Genavensis 44. The Marciana 44’s paraphrase is singular, and the other three contain the so-called Psellos paraphrase. Psellos’ paraphrase pre-dates that of the Marciana 454 by approximately four hundred years. 
II.	Discussion of Manuscripts	
The Marciana 454, also referred to as the Venetus A, contains an interlinear paraphrase throughout book I and the approximately first third of book II, which becomes more fragmentary after I.175. This paraphrase is unique among manuscripts, but shares common features with the paraphrases of Psellos and Theodorus Gaza, as indicated by the comparison conducted by Ludwich (cf. Ludwich 513-515).(see exhibit A for break-down of scripts of paraphrase.) As Ludwich observes, the hand of the paraphrase is younger than that of the main text (“juengerer Hand (15. Jahrh.?), eine Interlinearparaphrase (darueber schweigt W. Dindorf in seiner Vorrede zu den Ilias-Scholien), die den oben besprcohenen nicht unwesentlich abweicht,“ Ludwich 493).
	The Marciana 841 begins in book XIV, with XV as the first complete book. MS 841 presents the text of the poem and the paraphrase by the half-line (hemistich). From a small sampling, one sees that the lines are cut with obvious consideration for the formula. This is not to say that the separation is arbitrary or without reason, but rather that the half-line demarcations appear to be based more on a syllabic or metrical basis than on a formulaic one (see exhibit B for cursory line-by-line analysis). The line split occurs most frequently in the third, and less often the fourth, foot.  
	The Escorial Ω.I.12 presents the same paraphrase family in parallel with full lines. 
	Based on the coincidence of the Psellos paraphrase and the scholia vulgata, Ludwich posits that the two come from an Ur-source, so that they represent divergent strains from the same family („Das Resultat kann nicht zweitehalt sein: an einer auffallend grossen Anzahl von Stellen decken sich die Paraphrasen genau mit den Scholia vulg., am auffaelligsten die Psellos-Paraphrase, die sogar das von den anderen Uebersetzern verschmaehte /kaka// fuer /a)/legea/...uzw“ (Luwdich 515). Only Psellos is older than Schol. Vulg.; the others are definitely later. Scholia vulgata and Psellos might share “Q,” Ludwich 516). 	Spooner concurs, in some sense, with this point, “The continuous grammatical paraphrases on papyrus and tablets published to date match, not surprisingly, the scholia minora and D in their choice of vocabulary” (Spooner 23).
	A comparison between the Bekker paraphrase and that of the Marciana 454 suggest similarities with consistent differences. 
